Native onchain development - Updated program state management lesson (#413)
solana-foundation/developer-content: content/courses/native-onchain-development/program-state-management.md

objectives:
  - Describe the process of creating a new account using a Program Derived
    Address (PDA)
  - Demonstrate how to use seeds to derive a PDA
  - Use the space required by an account to calculate the amount of rent (in
    lamports) a user must allocate
  - Use a Cross Program Invocation (CPI) to initialize an account with a PDA as
    the address of the new account
  - Explain how to update the data stored on a new account
description:
  "Learn how programs store data using Solana's built-in key-value store."
---

## Summary

- Program state is stored in other accounts, not in the program itself.
- A Program Derived Address (PDA) is derived from a program ID and optional

>   seeds, and it is used as the address for a storage account.

Author: Improved this as per suggestions.

- Creating an account requires calculating the necessary space and corresponding
  rent in lamports.

> - A Cross Program Invocation (CPI) to the `create_account` instruction on the

Reviewer: instruction handler. See https://github.com/solana-foundation/developer-content/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#prose

```suggestion
- A Cross Program Invocation (CPI) to the `create_account` instruction handler on the
```

  System Program is needed to create a new account.
- Updating the data field on an account involves serializing (converting to a
  byte array) the data into the account.

## Lesson

Solana maintains speed, efficiency, and extensibility by making programs

> stateless. Instead of storing state on the program, programs use Solana's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stateless. Instead of storing state alongside the program's executable, programs use Solana's
```

account model to read and write state to separate PDA accounts.

This model is flexible but can be challenging if you're unfamiliar with it. In
this lesson, we'll start simple and gradually introduce more complex programs.
You'll learn the basics of state management in a Solana program, including
representing the state as a Rust type, creating accounts using PDAs, and

> serializing account data.

Author: Updated for better readability and clarity. Let me know if it needs further improvement.

### Program State

All Solana accounts have a data field that holds a byte array, making accounts
as flexible as files on a computer. You can store anything in an account, as
long as it has the necessary storage space.

Just like files in a traditional filesystem conform to specific formats like PDF
or MP3, data stored in a Solana account must follow a pattern to be retrieved
and deserialized into something usable.

#### Represent State as a Rust Type

When writing a program in Rust, we typically create this "format" by defining a
Rust data type. This is similar to how we created an enum to represent discrete

> instructions in the [first part of this lesson](basic-program-pt-1).

Author: Fixed link as per guidelines to point to the enum section.

) -> ProgramResult
```

In this lesson, we'll use `invoke_signed`, which uses the seeds, bump seed, and
program ID to derive a PDA and sign an instruction. The signer field for an

> account is set to true if the derived PDA matches any of the passed accounts.

Author: Added more details for clarity with explicit callouts.

of values. Iterators are used in Solana programs to safely iterate over the list
of accounts passed into the program entry point through the `accounts` argument.

#### Rust Iterator

The iterator pattern allows you to perform tasks on a sequence of items. The
`iter()` method creates an iterator object that references a collection. In
Rust, iterators are lazy and have no effect until methods that consume the
iterator are called. Use the `next()` function to get the next element in the
sequence, advancing the iterator each time.

```rust
let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3];

// Create the iterator over the vec
let v1_iter = v1.iter();

// Use the iterator to get the first item
let first_item = v1_iter.next();

// Use the iterator to get the second item
let second_item = v1_iter.next();
```

#### Solana Accounts Iterator

When processing instructions in a Solana program, the `AccountInfo` for all
required accounts is passed through a single `accounts` argument. To parse these
accounts and use them within your instruction handler, create an iterator with a

> mutable reference to `accounts`.

Author: Have made it better for readability and clarity with detailed explaination.

## Lab

This section introduces several new concepts. Let’s practice them together by
continuing with the Movie Review program from the previous lesson. Even if
you’re starting with this lesson, you should be able to follow along. We'll be
using the [Solana Playground](https://beta.solpg.io) to write, build, and deploy
our code.

As a refresher, we are building a Solana program that lets users review movies.

> In the last lesson, we deserialized the instruction data passed in by the user

Author: Updated as per guidelines to the previous lesson.
